[0018] SPIRV resource representation (#98)
llvm/wg-hlsl: proposals/XXXX-spirv-resource-representation.md

will be represented.

## Motivation

The HLSL resources are fundamental to HLSL, and they are required in a Vulkan
implementation.

## Proposed solution

We want to match the general solution proposed in
[0006-resource-representations.md](0006-resource-representations.md). The
`@llvm.spv.handle.fromBinding` intrinsic will be used to get a handle to the
resource. It will return a target type to represent the handle. Then other
intrinsics will be used to access the resource using the handle. Previous
proposals left open what the target types should be for SPIR-V.

The general pattern for the solution will be that `@llvm.spv.handle.fromBinding`
will return a SPIR-V pointer to a type `T`. The type for `T` will be detailed
when discussing each HLSL resource type. The SPIR-V backend will create a global
variable with type `T` if `range_size` is 1, and `T[range_size]` otherwise.

The reason we want `@llvm.spv.handle.fromBinding` to return a pointer is to make
it easier to satisfy the SPIR-V requirements in the
[Universal Validation Rules](https://registry.khronos.org/SPIR-V/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#_universal_validation_rules).

> Specifically,

Author: I want to redo this. Types for the image types will not be pointer. It fits better with the idea that the function returns a handle. We will still use a pointer to RWStructuredBuffer and the like. In SPIR-V there is no handle for these resources. In this sense, the pointer becomes the handle.

The issue with adding the load of the handle in the same basic block has been handled by expanding postponing the expansion of `handle.fromBinding` until we see the use of the handle.

> All OpSampledImage instructions, or instructions that load an image or sampler
> reference, must be in the same block in which their Result <id> are consumed.

It is the responsibility of the intrinsics that use the handles to load the
images and samplers.

The following sections will reference table 4 in the
[shader resrouce interface](https://docs.vulkan.org/spec/latest/chapters/interfaces.html#interfaces-resources)
for Vulkan.

### Textures and typed buffers

> All of these resource types are represented using an image type in SPIRV. The
> `Texture*` types are implemented as sampled images. the `RWTexture*` types are
> implemented as storage images. `Buffer` is implemented as a uniform buffer, and
> `RWBuffer` is implemented as a storage buffer.

Author: ```suggestion
All of these resource types are represented using an image type in SPIRV. The
`Texture*` types are implemented as sampled images. the `RWTexture*` types are
implemented as storage images. `Buffer` is implemented as a uniform texel buffer, and
`RWBuffer` is implemented as a storage texel buffer.
```

[shader resrouce interface](https://docs.vulkan.org/spec/latest/chapters/interfaces.html#interfaces-resources)
for Vulkan.

### SPIR-V target types

The must be appropriate SPIR-V target types to represent the HLSL resources. We
could try to represent the resources using the exact SPIR-V type that will be.
The problem is that the HLSL resources does not map too closely with SPIR-V.

Consider `StructuredBuffer`, `RWStructuredBuffer`,
`RasterizerOrderedStructuredBuffer`, `AppendStructureBuffer`, and
`ConsumeStructuredBuffer`. These resource types do not map directly to SPIR-V.
They have multiple implicit features that need to map to different SPIR-V:

1.  They all contains an array of memory that maps to a storage buffer.
2.  Other than `StructuredBuffer`, they all contains a separate counter variable
    that is its own storage buffer.
3.  The references to `RasterizerOrderedStructuredBuffer` are contained in
    implicit critical regions. In SPIR-V, explicit instructions are used to
    start and stop the critical region.

This makes it impossible to create a handle type that maps directly to a SPIR-V
type. To handle this, we will create a target type `spv.Buffer`:

```

> target("spv.Buffer", ElementType, StorageClass, IsWriteable, IsROV)

Author: Rename to spv.VulkanBuffer

> target("spv.Buffer", ElementType, StorageClass, IsWriteable, IsROV, CounterSet, CounterBinding)

Author: Rename to spv.VulkanBufferWithCounter

pass in SPIR-V Tools.

The types for the handles will be target types that represent pointers. The
handle for the array will be

```llvm-ir
%T = type { ... } ; Fully laid out version of T.
%T1 = type { [0 x %T] } ; The SPIR-V backend should turn the array into a runtime array.
target("spirv.Type", target(spirv.Literal, StorageClass), %T1,
/* OpTypePointer */32)
```

TODO: I need to check if a call to `int_spv_assign_decoration` can be added that
will decorate the target type with the block decoration.

The types for the buffers must have an
[explicit layout](https://registry.khronos.org/SPIR-V/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#ExplicitLayout).
The layout information will be obtained from the DataLayout class:

1.  Struct offsets will come from `DataLayout::getStructLayout`, which returns
    the offset for each member.
2.  The array stride will be the size of the array elements. This assumes that
    structs have appropriate padding at the end to ensure its size is a multiple
    of its alignment.
3.  Matrix stride?
4.  Row major vs Col major?

> It is Clang's responsibility to make sure that the data layout is set correctly,

Reviewer: How do we plan on letting the backend know we explicitly padded it vs when padding is required? Do we expect the frontend to always emit pre-padded packed structs matching the correct layout, or do we sometimes plan on the data layout/backend to handle this?

Author: For now, the backend will assume that it can always get the offset of a member using ``DataLayout::getStructLayout`. The frontend will have to add explicit padding if necessary.

In the backend the explicit padding will turn into unused members. We may need to revisit when we want to do reflection. However, reflection will require the names of the members to be passed along. Whatever mechanism we use for that may be able to tell us that a member was just padding.

[shader resrouce interface](https://docs.vulkan.org/spec/latest/chapters/interfaces.html#interfaces-resources)
for Vulkan.

### SPIR-V target types

The must be appropriate SPIR-V target types to represent the HLSL resources. We
could try to represent the resources using the exact SPIR-V type that will be.
The problem is that the HLSL resources does not map too closely with SPIR-V.

Consider `StructuredBuffer`, `RWStructuredBuffer`,
`RasterizerOrderedStructuredBuffer`, `AppendStructureBuffer`, and
`ConsumeStructuredBuffer`. These resource types do not map directly to SPIR-V.
They have multiple implicit features that need to map to different SPIR-V:

1.  They all contains an array of memory that maps to a storage buffer.
2.  Other than `StructuredBuffer`, they all contains a separate counter variable
    that is its own storage buffer.
3.  The references to `RasterizerOrderedStructuredBuffer` are contained in
    implicit critical regions. In SPIR-V, explicit instructions are used to
    start and stop the critical region.

This makes it impossible to create a handle type that maps directly to a SPIR-V
type. To handle this, we will create a target type `spv.VulkanBuffer`:

```

> target("spv.VulkanBuffer", ElementType, StorageClass, IsWriteable, IsROV)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
target("spv.VulkanBuffer", ElementType, StorageClass, IsWriteable, IsROV [, CounterSet, CounterBinding])
```

Reviewer: That's right (btw I'm assuming you did a type and meant `RWStructuredBuffer` for `c`)
But in that case, when you say `set & bindings can be provided by CounterSet/CounterBinding`, where would those be set?

Author: I missed removed those comments. I will do that.

    the handle of the array.
3.  Calls to `@llvm.spv.resource.updatecounter` will be replaced by a call to
    `@llvm.spv.resource.getpointer` with the handle of the counter followed by
    an atomic add.
4.  If the type of the original handle is rasterizer ordered, all uses of
    `@llvm.spv.resource.getpointer` will be surrounded by instructions to begin
    and end the critical region.

A separate legalization pass will then move the critical region markers so that
they follow the rules required by the SPIR-V specification. This will be the
same as the
[`InvocationInterlockPlacementPass`](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Tools/blob/682bcd51548e670811f1d03511968bb59a1157ce/source/opt/invocation_interlock_placement_pass.h)
pass in SPIR-V Tools.

The types for the handles will be target types that represent pointers. The
handle for the array will be

```llvm-ir
%T = type { ... } ; Fully laid out version of T.
%T1 = type { [0 x %T] } ; The SPIR-V backend should turn the array into a runtime array.
target("spirv.Type", target(spirv.Literal, StorageClass), %T1,
/* OpTypePointer */32)
```

TODO: I need to check if a call to `int_spv_assign_decoration` can be added that

> will decorate the target type with the block decoration.

Author: I still need to look into this.

Author: We will not be generating this intrinsic in clang.

The types for the buffers must have an
[explicit layout](https://registry.khronos.org/SPIR-V/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#ExplicitLayout).

> The layout information will be obtained from the DataLayout class:

Author: This is being discussed in the constant buffer proposal. See https://github.com/llvm/wg-hlsl/pull/94#discussion_r1943104242.

Author: In the short term, we will go with this plan. We can revisit when we add `vk::offset`.

1.  Struct offsets will come from `DataLayout::getStructLayout`, which returns
    the offset for each member.
2.  The array stride will be the size of the array elements. This assumes that
    structs have appropriate padding at the end to ensure its size is a multiple
    of its alignment.
3.  Matrix stride?
4.  Row major vs Col major?

It is Clang's responsibility to make sure that the data layout is set correctly,
and that the structs have the correct explicit padding for this to be correct.

The type of the handle for the counter will be

```llvm-ir
target("spirv.Type", target(spirv.Literal, /* StorageBuffer */ 12),
target("spirv.DecoratedType", { i32 }, /* block */ 2),
/* OpTypePointer */32)
```

### Textures and typed buffers

All of these resource types are represented using an image type in SPIRV. The
`Texture*` types are implemented as sampled images. The `RWTexture*` types are
implemented as storage images. `Buffer` is implemented as a uniform buffer, and
`RWBuffer` is implemented as a storage buffer.

For these cases the return type from `@llvm.spv.handle.fromBinding` would be the
image type matching the resource type:

```llvm-ir
target("spirv.Image", ...)

> ```

Author: I should add a tables being explicit about how each HLSL resource type will be represented.

I will need an extended discussion on the image format.

Author: There is a table in proposal 15, which I will link to. No need to repeat.

The details of the `spirv.Image` type depend on the specific declaration, and

> are detailed in the "Mapping Resource Attributes to DXIL and SPIR-V" proposal.

Author: I'll fill the details in this proposal, and not reference the other one.

Author: I will add a link to the other proposal. I don't want to repeat info anymore.

For `RWBuffer<T>` and `RWTexture*<T>` resource types, if the Vulkan version is
1.3 or later, the image format will be `Unknown`. This satisfies
[VUID-RuntimeSpirv-apiVersion-07954](https://docs.vulkan.org/spec/latest/appendices/spirvenv.html#VUID-RuntimeSpirv-apiVersion-07954)
and

> [VUID-RuntimeSpirv-apiVersion-07955](https://docs.vulkan.org/spec/latest/appendices/spirvenv.html#VUID-RuntimeSpirv-apiVersion-07954).

Reviewer: Do you want to allow `vk::image_format` in VK 1.3+ still? Or always emit `Unknown`?

Author: That is a good question. We can deal with that when we implement `vk::image_format`. I'd want feedback from IHVs to know if there is any advantage to using a specific format or not.

Author: I added an open question for this.

## Alternatives considered (Optional)

### Returning pointers as the handle

We considered making all handles return by `@llvm.spv.handle.fromBinding` to be
pointers to some type. For textures, it would return a pointer to the image
type.

This would have been nice because load of the image object would no longer be in
`@llvm.spv.handle.fromBinding` and would be in the intrinsic that uses the
handle. That would automatically make it in the same basic block as it use.

The problem is that this does not work well for structured buffers, because, as
far as HLSL is concerned, the handle for a structured buffer references two
resources as detailed above. There is no way to represent this properly.

Less important, but still worth mentioning, is that in SPIR-V, the image object
is the handle to the image. We chose the design the was the better match
conceptually. Replicating the load of the image object is not a difficult
problem to solve.

## Open Questions

1.  How will the binding for the counter resource be represented?

They will have to somehow be added to the `resource.gethandlefrombinding`. They
cannot be added to the target type. If they were, the types for the resource

> aliases would not match, causing problem in codegen.

Reviewer: This is obsolete right?

Author: Explained above. This is still needed.

## Introduction

There is a need to represent the HLSL resources in llvm-ir in a way that the
SPIR-V backend is able to create the correct code. We have already done some
implementation work for `Buffer` and `RWBuffer`. This was done as a
proof-of-concept, and now we needed to determine how the other resource types
will be represented.

## Motivation

The HLSL resources are fundamental to HLSL, and they are required in a Vulkan
implementation.

## Proposed solution

We want to match the general solution proposed in
[0006-resource-representations.md](0006-resource-representations.md). The
`@llvm.spv.handle.fromBinding` intrinsic will be used to get a handle to the
resource. It will return a target type to represent the handle. Then other
intrinsics will be used to access the resource using the handle. Previous
proposals left open what the target types should be for SPIR-V.

The type for the handle will depend on the type of resource, and will be
detailed in the following sections.

The following sections will reference table 4 in the
[shader resrouce interface](https://docs.vulkan.org/spec/latest/chapters/interfaces.html#interfaces-resources)
for Vulkan.

### SPIR-V target types

> The must be appropriate SPIR-V target types to represent the HLSL resources. We

Reviewer 2: nit:

```suggestion
There must be appropriate SPIR-V target types to represent the HLSL resources. We
```

> could try to represent the resources using the exact SPIR-V type that will be.

Reviewer 2: nit:

```suggestion
could try to represent the resources using the exact SPIR-V type that will be needed.
```

The problem is that the HLSL resources does not map too closely with SPIR-V.

Consider `StructuredBuffer`, `RWStructuredBuffer`,
`RasterizerOrderedStructuredBuffer`, `AppendStructureBuffer`, and
`ConsumeStructuredBuffer`. These resource types do not map directly to SPIR-V.
They have multiple implicit features that need to map to different SPIR-V:

> 1.  They all contains an array of memory that maps to a storage buffer.

Reviewer 2: nit:

```suggestion
1.  They all contain an array of memory that maps to a storage buffer.
```

> 2.  Other than `StructuredBuffer`, they all contains a separate counter variable

Reviewer 2: nit:

```suggestion
2.  Other than `StructuredBuffer`, they all contain a separate counter variable
```

    that is its own storage buffer.
3.  The references to `RasterizerOrderedStructuredBuffer` are contained in
    implicit critical regions. In SPIR-V, explicit instructions are used to
    start and stop the critical region.

This makes it impossible to create a handle type that maps directly to a SPIR-V

> type. To handle this, we will create a target type `spv.VulkanBuffer`:

Reviewer 2: Would it be better to use a name different than `VulkanBuffer`, since it represents concepts that aren't from Vulkan? (ie, Vulkan doesn't have an exact concept of a rasterizer order view)

Reviewer 2: Also, should it be `spirv.VulkanBuffer` instead, to be more consistent with `spirv.Image`, `spirv.Type`, and so on?

Author: @Keenuts @cassiebeckley Do you have any suggestions for the name. At the heart, this encapsulates uniform buffers and storage buffer in vulkan. However, it does include more: rov and the counter variable. I'm not sure how to name it.

Reviewer: I would be tempted to make this a language intrinsic instead of `spirv`, something like `hlsl.Buffer` until the second stage of the lowering where you generate the `spv.resource.handleFromBinding` or `spv.resource.UpdateCounter`.

Last time we discussed something similar was the target builtins (https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-targetbuiltins-for-spirv-to-support-hlsl/83329)
But back then it was for simple intrinsics which would make sense as target intrinsics and could be reusable across frontends.

But here, since this carries the optional counter & buffer, and has a very hlsl-specific semantic, I feel it would be a good reason to keep it as a language-level builtin.

```
target("spv.VulkanBuffer", ElementType, StorageClass, IsWriteable, IsROV)
```

`ElementType` is the type for the storage buffer array, and `StorageClass` is

> the storage class for the array. `IsWritable` is true of the resource an be

Reviewer 2: nit:

```suggestion
the storage class for the array. `IsWriteable` is true if the resource can be
```

    counter, if necessary.
2.  Calls to `@llvm.spv.resource.getpointer` will have the handle replaced by
    the handle of the array.
3.  Calls to `@llvm.spv.resource.updatecounter` will be replaced by a call to
    `@llvm.spv.resource.getpointer` with the handle of the counter followed by
    an atomic add.
4.  If the type of the original handle is rasterizer ordered, all uses of
    `@llvm.spv.resource.getpointer` will be surrounded by instructions to begin
    and end the critical region.

A separate legalization pass will then move the critical region markers so that
they follow the rules required by the SPIR-V specification. This will be the
same as the
[`InvocationInterlockPlacementPass`](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Tools/blob/682bcd51548e670811f1d03511968bb59a1157ce/source/opt/invocation_interlock_placement_pass.h)
pass in SPIR-V Tools.

The types for the handles will be target types that represent pointers. The
handle for the array will be

```llvm-ir
%T = type { ... } ; Fully laid out version of T.
%T1 = type { [0 x %T] } ; The SPIR-V backend should turn the array into a runtime array.

> target("spirv.Type", target(spirv.Literal, StorageClass), %T1,

Reviewer 2: nit:

```suggestion
%T1_P = target("spirv.Type", target("spirv.Literal", StorageClass), %T1,
```

Reviewer 2: Also, I assume you're using a `spirv.Type` for the pointer to represent a typed pointer?

/* OpTypePointer */32)
```

The types for the buffers must have an
[explicit layout](https://registry.khronos.org/SPIR-V/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#ExplicitLayout).
The layout information will be obtained from the DataLayout class:

1.  Struct offsets will come from `DataLayout::getStructLayout`, which returns
    the offset for each member.
2.  The array stride will be the size of the array elements. This assumes that
    structs have appropriate padding at the end to ensure its size is a multiple
    of its alignment.
3.  Matrix stride?
4.  Row major vs Col major?

It is Clang's responsibility to make sure that the data layout is set correctly,
and that the structs have the correct explicit padding for this to be correct.

The type of the handle for the counter will be

```llvm-ir
target("spirv.Type", target(spirv.Literal, /* StorageBuffer */ 12),

> target("spirv.DecoratedType", { i32 }, /* block */ 2),

Reviewer 2: We've removed `spirv.DecoratedType` with the intent to use `int_spv_assign_decoration`.

Author: There is some stuff still in there that was suppose to be removed. The `spirv.VulkanBuffer` was suppose to encapsulate all of this.

Author: I'll remove this.

/* OpTypePointer */32)
```

### Textures and typed buffers

All of these resource types are represented using an image type in SPIRV. The
`Texture*` types are implemented as sampled images. The `RWTexture*` types are
implemented as storage images. `Buffer` is implemented as a uniform buffer, and
`RWBuffer` is implemented as a storage buffer.

For these cases the return type from `@llvm.spv.handle.fromBinding` would be the
image type matching the resource type:

```llvm-ir
target("spirv.Image", ...)
```

The details of the `spirv.Image` type depend on the specific declaration. Except
for the image format, the value for each operand is given in the
[Mapping Resource Attributes to DXIL and SPIR-V](https://github.com/llvm/wg-hlsl/blob/main/proposals/0015-resource-attributes-in-dxil-and-spirv.md)
proposal. For all resource types other than `Buffer<T>` and `RWBuffer<T>`, the
image format will be `Unknown`.

For `Buffer<T>`, if Clang can determine that the `StorageImageReadWithoutFormat`
capability is available, the image format will be `Unknown`. Similarly, with
`RWBuffer<T>` and the `StorageImageWriteWithoutFormat` capability. See Table 1
in the

> [Vulkan Environment for SPIR-V](https://docs.vulkan.org/spec/latest/appendices/spirvenv.html)

Reviewer 2: nit:

```suggestion
[Vulkan Environment for SPIR-V](https://docs.vulkan.org/spec/latest/appendices/spirvenv.html).
```

    `@llvm.spv.resource.getpointer` with the handle of the counter followed by
    an atomic add.
4.  If the type of the original handle is rasterizer ordered, all uses of
    `@llvm.spv.resource.getpointer` will be surrounded by instructions to begin
    and end the critical region.

A separate legalization pass will then move the critical region markers so that
they follow the rules required by the SPIR-V specification. This will be the
same as the
[`InvocationInterlockPlacementPass`](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Tools/blob/682bcd51548e670811f1d03511968bb59a1157ce/source/opt/invocation_interlock_placement_pass.h)
pass in SPIR-V Tools.

The types for the buffers must have an
[explicit layout](https://registry.khronos.org/SPIR-V/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#ExplicitLayout).
The layout information will be obtained from the DataLayout class:

1.  Struct offsets will come from `DataLayout::getStructLayout`, which returns
    the offset for each member.
2.  The array stride will be the size of the array elements. This assumes that
    structs have appropriate padding at the end to ensure its size is a multiple
    of its alignment.
3.  Matrix stride?

> 4.  Row major vs Col major?

Reviewer 3: I need to spend some time soon figuring out a design and plan for matrix types. There is a lot of complication there to figure out which will impact both DXIL and SPIRV.
